.. _epoch_information_doc:

=================
Epoch Information
=================

Description
-----------

At acquisition time, sweep epoch metadata is generated.
Epochs are contiguous time ranges in the input signal that feature certain signal shapes, such as e.g. pulse trains.
This information is exported with each data acquisition to the lab notebook with the key "Epochs" for each DA channel.

Retrieving Epoch Information from the Lab Notebook
--------------------------------------------------

The epoch information can be retrieved from the lab notebook with

 .. code-block:: igorpro

    WAVE/T textualValues   = GetLBTextualValues(device)
    WAVE/T epochLBEntries = GetLastSetting(textualValues, sweepNumber, EPOCHS_ENTRY_KEY, DATA_ACQUISITION_MODE)
    WAVE/T epochChannel = ListToTextWaveMD(epochLBEntries[channelNumber], 2, rowSep = ":", colSep = ",")

The epochChannel wave has four columns:
Column 1: start time
Column 2: end time
Column 3: epoch description - a semi-colon separated list of epoch descriptors. e.g., `Epoch=1;Type=Pulse Train;Amplitude=1;Pulse=0;`
Column 4: (tree) level. e.g., wavebuilder defined EPOCH tree level = 1, a sub epoch of a wavebuilder defined EPOCH = 2

Each row is an epoch entry.

Format
------

The times are in seconds where 0 is the beginning of the signal input. The reference signal is the DA input wave.
The epochChannel wave can contain several entries with different levels covering the same time range.
Epochs with a level of zero name the main components of the input signal.
Typical epochs with zero level are 'Inserted Test Pulse' and 'StimSet'.

A level of one designates a sub epoch of a zero level epoch and can correspond to, for example, the leading baseline a 
'Inserted Test Pulse', the pulse component, and the trailing baseline of the pulse. For 'StimSet's that are level zero, the associated
Stimset-Epochs, like Ramp, Pulse Train, and so on are level one.

Accordingly level two epochs are sub epochs of level one epochs. For example, the level two epoch of a pulse train
contains a single pulse of the pulse train.

The start time of a level n epoch equals the start time of the first level n+1 epoch within the level n epochs time interval.

All epochs between 0 and end of the input signal are consecutive and without gaps (contiguous).
All level n+1 epochs are contiguous for the associated n epoch.

The following table sketches how epochs of different levels could be distributed in the range of the full output data:

+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                         output data time series range   0 - 100 [s]                                     |
+===============================================================================================+=========================+
|                              level 0: 0 - 60                                                  |level 0: 60 - 100        |
+-----------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
|level 1: 0 - 20        |level 1: 20 - 60                                                       |                         |
+-----------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-------------------------+
|                       |level 2:  20 - 30|level 2:  30 - 45|level 2:  45 - 51|level 2:  51 - 60|                         |
+-----------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-------------------------+

The entries in the wave are sorted by increasing start times and secondary by decreasing end times.

optimized overlap distributed data acquisistion (oodDAQ) regions
----------------------------------------------------------------

oodDAQ regions are  saved as level two epoch with and named oodDAQRegion. While regular epochs are generated from the stimset note,
oodDAQ regions are generated by the oodDAQ optimizer. Thus the oodDAQRegion epochs are not bound to the constraints described in the previous section.
The oodDAQ regions are added 'as is' to the epochs.

Naming
------

The following table describes the 1:1 relationship between epoch names and MIES feature names:

+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| Level | Level | Level | Name                                  | Origin                                                  |
+=======+=======+=======+=======================================+=========================================================+
|   0   |       |       | Baseline                              | Onset Delay                                             |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|   0   |       |       | Baseline                              | Delay of channel due to Distributed DAQ [OptOv]         |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|   0   |       |       | Inserted TP;Test Pulse;               | Inserted TP                                             |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|       |   1   |       | Baseline                              | preceding baseline of inserted TP                       |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|       |   1   |       | +pulse;Amplitude=x;                   | pulse time of inserted TP                               |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|       |   1   |       | Baseline                              | subsequent baseline of inserted TP                      |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|   0   |       |       | Stimset                               | Stimset                                                 |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|       |   1   |       | Epoch=x;Type=x;Amplitude=x;Details=x; | Stimset-Epoch                                           |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|       |       |   2   | Baseline                              | Stimset-Epoch baseline before first pulse (pulse train) |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|       |       |   2   | +Pulse=x;                             | Stimset-Epoch component, example pulse train            |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|       |       |   2   | oodDAQRegion=x                        | oodDAQ region                                           |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|   0   |       |       | Baseline                              | trailing baseline from Distributed DAQ [OptOv]          |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
|   0   |       |       | Baseline                              | Termination Delay                                       |
+-------+-------+-------+---------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------+

If the name entry begins with '+' then it is appended to the higher-level name. The 'x' is a place holder where additional information is included in the names, such as
Stimset-Epoch numbering, or amplitudes.
Currently only pulse trains (see below) are supported with level two detail for Stimset-Epochs.
Depending on the setup of the data acquisition, not every entry listed in the table has to appear in the epochs table.

The 'Details' key for the Stimset-Epoch can contain a combination of 'Mixed frequency' or 'Poisson distribution' with 'shuffled' as originally configured for the Stimset
in the waveBuilder.

Pulse Trains
------------

Pulse Trains are a type of Stimset-Epochs which is widely used and covered in high detail in the epochs table. For pulse trains each pulse gets an level two epoch entry.
The time interval of a pulse begins when the signal is above base line level and includes the trailing baseline (that precedes the next pulse) unless it is the last pulse
in the pulse train. An epoch named 'Baseline' is inserted if the first pulse in the pulse train has a leading baseline. This is applies for flipped Stimsets containing
Stimset-Epochs with type pulse train.
