# Overview

MIES is a sweep based data acquisition tool written in Igor Pro.

MIES has three primary user interfaces: The waveBuilder, DA_Ephys, and
dataBrowser. The waveBuilder is used to generate stimulus sets. The DA_Ephys
GUI is used to control and observe data acquisition in real time.  The
DataBrowser is used to browse acquired data. All three interfaces may be operated in parallel.

The Wavebuilder is used to create a series of related sweeps (i.e., timeseries) called a stimulus
set. A sweep is composed of up to 99 epochs. Each epoch can contain one of
seven different waveforms types, arbitrary combinations of waveform types, or a
custom waveform. A custom waveform can be a sweep from a different stimulus
set, or a waveform generated by the user using other tools. Custom code to
automate analysis or data acquisition, executed during acquisition, can be
associated with a stimulus set as well.

GUI control of data acquisition is achieved using the DA_Ephys panel. For
example, the user can assign a stimulus set to a digital to analog (DA)
channel. The DA_Epys panel centralizes control of multiple hardware components
necessary for performing electrophysiology experiments, including the DAC,
amplifier, and pressure regulators.

The MIES DataBrowser allows the user to view acquired sweeps and metadata
during and after an experiment. It has several display modes that facilitate
recording from multiple channels simultaneously.

MIES is scalable: MIES can control up to 5 DACs (Instrutech/Heka and National
Instruments), multiple amplifiers (Molecular Devices 700B), and pressure
regulators (Proportion Air).

It is possible to control MIES remotely with [ZeroMQ](https://alleninstitute.github.io/MIES/ZeroMQ-XOP-Readme.html).
Data may be analyzed with Igor Pro or with other tools using [NeurodataWithoutBorders (NWB)](https://www.nwb.org)
files generated by MIES.

# Download
The latest version is available [here](https://github.com/AllenInstitute/MIES/releases/tag/latest).
